# Dr. Julia Filiberti Allen '12

Dr. Julia Filiberti Allen '12 is an entrepreneur and advisor at the intersection of business growth and deep tech working with small businesses in the aerospace and defense industry. Prior to starting her advisory practice, she was the CTO of Saab, Inc., a Technical Area Director at BAE Systems FAST Labs, and member of the Senior Professional Staff at The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. Before entering the private sector, she served as a Department of Defense SMART fellow as a federal government civilian and later as a Captain in the U.S. Army National Guard, where she commanded over 180 intelligence professionals. She is a trusted advisor across the defense R&D ecosystem and has served as a thought leader and panelist at key industry and government forums, including NDIA’s Emerging Technologies for Defense and the U.S. Chief Digital and AI Office’s Responsible AI in Defense Workshop. Julia is an Adjunct Professor at Purdue University, where she mentors graduate students in autonomy and AI.

She holds a Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Maryland, where her dissertation explored explainable AI and competency prediction in deep learning systems. She earned a M.S. in Applied & Computational Mathematics from the Johns Hopkins University and a B.S. in Mathematics from Dickinson College.  The daughter of a U.S. Army War College professor, Julia grew up in Carlisle and graduated from Carlisle High School, where she played basketball and tennis.
