## PE - Project Effectiveness

### Introduction

Project Effectiveness is a measure of the instructor's impression of the student's participation in and contributions to the team's project work.

### Assignment

You will demonstrate your participation in the team's project work by: 

- Participating effectively in the team's project work, attending out-of-class team meetings and being sure to invest an appropriate amount of time in this work each week.
- Documenting your work via project artifacts as described in the specific assignments or project contributions on which your team is working.
- Participating in work day team meetings with the instructor and communicating your engagement, efforts and contributions to the team's work.
- Completing the feedback session on [TEAMMATES](https://teammatesv4.appspot.com) by 8:00am on the assigned date.

### Components

Each Project Effectiveness score will be based on one or more of the following criteria depending upon the activities that have occurred during the time interval since the prior Project Effectiveness score was assigned.

- TEAMMATES Feedback Sessions: Feedback sessions that include your self-assessment, your assessments of your teammates' work, and their assessments of your work will be factored into your Project Effectiveness score.  All feedback will be reviewed, interpreted and checked for reasonable consistency with the instructor's perceptions of your work. Feedback on your work that significantly deviates from the instructor's perceptions may be weighted less heavily, discarded, and/or investigated further during the determination of your Project Effectiveness score. 
- Project Assignment Artifacts: An assessment of the completeness and quality of any project artifacts generated by you (e.g. issue tickets, commits, pull requests, documents, etc.) will be included in determining your Project Effectiveness score.
- Class Work Day and Other Meetings: Your presence and participation in team meetings with the instructor during class work days and in other meetings you may have with the instructor (e.g. office hours) will factor into your Project Effectiveness score.  The instructor will use these meetings to form a perception of your time commitment, effort and effectiveness in the team's project work.

If you have concerns regarding the fairness of the TEAMMATES feedback from your team or the accuracy of the instructor's perception of your work please discuss your concerns with the instructor. In either case, please be prepared to provide evidence of the time investment, effort and/or effectiveness that you feel may have been undervalued.